📖 docs: machinepool contract spec (#12971)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/book/src/developer/providers/contracts/infra-machinepool.md

# Contract rules for InfraMachinePool

Infrastructure providers CAN OPTIONALLY implement an InfraMachinePool resource.

The goal of an InfraMachinePool is to manage the lifecycle of a provider-specific pool of machines using a provider specific service (like auto-scale groups in AWS & virtual machine scalesets in Azure).

> The machines in the pool may be physical or virtual instances (although most likely virtual), and they represent the infastructure for Kubernetes nodes.

Author: Changed.

Note:

- `All resources` refers to all the provider's resources "core" Cluster API interacts with;
  In the context of this page: `InfraMachinePool`, `InfraMachinePoolTemplate` and corresponding list types
  
### All resources: scope

All resources MUST be namespace-scoped.

### All resources: `TypeMeta` and `ObjectMeta` field

All resources MUST have the standard Kubernetes `TypeMeta` and `ObjectMeta` fields.

### All resources: `APIVersion` field value

In Kubernetes `APIVersion` is a combination of API group and version.
Special consideration MUST applies to both API group and version for all the resources Cluster API interacts with.

#### All resources: API group

The domain for Cluster API resources is `cluster.x-k8s.io`, and infrastructure providers under the Kubernetes SIGS org
generally use `infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io` as API group.

If your provider uses a different API group, you MUST grant full read/write RBAC permissions for resources in your API group
to the Cluster API core controllers. The canonical way to do so is via a `ClusterRole` resource with the [aggregation label]
`cluster.x-k8s.io/aggregate-to-manager: "true"`.

> The following is an example ClusterRole for a `FooMachine` resource in the `infrastructure.foo.com` API group:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is an example ClusterRole for a `FooMachinePool` resource in the `infrastructure.foo.com` API group:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
    name: capi-foo-clusters
    labels:
      cluster.x-k8s.io/aggregate-to-manager: "true"
rules:
- apiGroups:
    - infrastructure.foo.com
  resources:
    - foomachinepools
    - foomachinepooltemplates
  verbs:
    - create
    - delete
    - get
    - list
    - patch
    - update
    - watch
```

> Note: The write permissions are required because Cluster API manages InfraMachinePools generated from InfraMachinePooolTemplates when using ClusterClass and managed topologies, also InfraMachinePoolTemplates are managed directly by Cluster API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: The write permissions are required because Cluster API manages InfraMachinePools generated from InfraMachinePooolTemplates; when using ClusterClass and managed topologies, also InfraMachinePoolTemplates are managed directly by Cluster API.
```

Instead, prefer choosing a version that matches the stability of the provider API and its backward compatibility guarantees.

Additionally:

Providers MUST set `cluster.x-k8s.io/<version>` label on the InfraMachinePool Custom Resource Definitions.

The label is a map from a Cluster API contract version to your Custom Resource Definition versions.
The value is an underscore-delimited (_) list of versions. Each value MUST point to an available version in your CRD Spec.

The label allows Cluster API controllers to perform automatic conversions for object references, the controllers will pick
the last available version in the list if multiple versions are found.

To apply the label to CRDs it’s possible to use labels in your `kustomization.yaml` file, usually in `config/crd`:

```yaml
labels:
- pairs:
    cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta1: v1beta1
    cluster.x-k8s.io/v1beta2: v1beta2
```

An example of this is in the [AWS infrastructure provider](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws/blob/main/config/crd/kustomization.yaml).

### InfraMachinePool, InfraMachinePoolList resource definition

> You CAN define a InfraMachinePool resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You MUST define a InfraMachinePool resource.
```
I would say must because once you decide to create a machine pool implementation, this is a must have

Author: Yes i think in this context that makes sense 😄

The InfraMachinePool resource name must have the format produced by `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/contract.CalculateCRDName(Group, Kind)`.

Note: Cluster API is using such a naming convention to avoid an expensive CRD lookup operation when looking for labels from
the CRD definition of the InfraMachinePool resource.

It is a generally applied convention to use names in the format `${env}MachinePool`, where ${env} is a, possibly short, name
for the environment in question. For example `AWSMachinePool` is an implementation for Amazon Web Services, and `AzureMachinePool`
is one for Azure.

```go
// +kubebuilder:object:root=true
// +kubebuilder:resource:path=foomachinepools,shortName=foomp,scope=Namespaced,categories=cluster-api
// +kubebuilder:storageversion
// +kubebuilder:subresource:status

// FooMachinePool is the Schema for foomachinepools.
type FooMachinePool struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`

> 	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
```
(BTW it seems also wrong in the infra-machine contract)

    Spec FooMachinePoolSpec `json:"spec,omitempty"`
    Status FooMachinePoolStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

type FooMachinePoolSpec struct {
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool spec.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}

type FooMachinePoolStatus struct {
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool status.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}
```

For each InfraMachinePool resource, you MUST also add the corresponding list resource.

> The list resource MUST be named as `<InfraMachine>List`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list resource MUST be named as `<InfraMachinePool>List`.
```

If a providers implementation of a InfraMachinePool supports "MachinePool Machines" (where all the replicas in a MachinePool can be represented by a Machine & InfraMachine) then specifying and supplying a value for this field signals to Cluster API that the provider is opted-in to MachinePoolMachines.

If you want to adopt MachinePool Machines then you MUST have a `status.infrastructureMachineKind` field and the field must contain the resource kind of the InfraMachine that represent the replicas of the pool. For example, for the AWS provider the value would be set to `AWSMachine`.

```go
type FooMachinePoolStatus struct {
	// InfrastructureMachineKind is the kind of the infrastructure resources behind MachinePool Machines.
	// +optional
	InfrastructureMachineKind string `json:"infrastructureMachineKind,omitempty"`
   
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool status.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}
```

By opting into MachinePool Machines its the responsibility of the provider to create an instance of a InfraMachine for every replica and manage their lifecycle.

> ### InfraMachinePool: instances

Reviewer: I would suggest to add a definition to what an instance is in the context of MP

Also, if this field is not used by CAPI let's make it clear.
e.g.

Please note that this field is not used by CAPI. Nevertheless, it is documented in this contract to foster design choice that will ensure a consistent user experience across all the MachinePool implementations,

```go
type FooMachinePoolStatus struct {
    // Instances contains the status for each instance in the pool
    // +optional
    Instances []FooMachinePoolInstanceStatus `json:"instances,omitempty"`
    
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool status.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}

// FooMachinePoolInstanceStatus contains instance status information about a FooMachinePool.
type FooMachinePoolInstanceStatus struct {
 // Addresses contains the associated addresses for the machine.
 // +optional
 Addresses []clusterv1.MachineAddress `json:"addresses,omitempty"`

 // InstanceName is the identification of the Machine Instance within the Machine Pool
 InstanceName string `json:"instanceName,omitempty"`

 // ProviderID is the provider identification of the Machine Pool Instance
 // +optional
 ProviderID *string `json:"providerID,omitempty"`

 // Version defines the Kubernetes version for the Machine Instance
 // +optional
 Version *string `json:"version,omitempty"`

 // Ready denotes that the machine is ready
 // +optional
 Ready bool `json:"ready"`
}
```

> ### InfraMachinePool: providerID

Reviewer: Out of curiosity, is this field used in core CAPI?

Each InfraMachinePool MAY specify a provider ID on `spec.providerID` that can be used to identify the InfraMachinePool.

```go
type FooMachinePoolSpec struct {
    // providerID is the identification ID of the FooMachinePool.
    // +optional
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=512
	ProviderID string `json:"providerID,omitempty"`
    
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool spec.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}
```

NOTE: To align with API conventions, we recommend since the v1beta2 contract that the `ProviderID` field should be
of type `string`.

### InfraMachinePool: providerIDList

Each InfraMachinePool MUST supply a list of the identification IDs of the machine instances managed by the machine pool by storing these in `spec.providerIDList`.

```go
type FooMachinePoolSpec struct {
    // ProviderIDList is the list of identification IDs of machine instances managed by this Machine Pool

> 	// +optional

Reviewer: Let's align the field definition to what we have in CAPI MachinePool

```suggestion
	// +optional
	// +listType=atomic
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=10000
	// +kubebuilder:validation:items:MinLength=1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:items:MaxLength=512
```

(please also double check other fields, we invested a lot in the latest API iteration on getting markers right)

	ProviderIDList []string `json:"providerIDList,omitempty"`
    
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool spec.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}
```

Cluster API uses this list to determine the status of the machine pool and to know when replicas have been deleted, at which point the Node will be deleted.

> ### InfraMachinePool: ready

Reviewer: I would suggest to call this `InfraMachinePool: initialization completed` and chart a part to move from `status.ready` to `status.initialization.provisioned`, thus aligning to other CAPI resources (see https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/main/docs/proposals/20240916-improve-status-in-CAPI-resources.md#machinepool-newconditions).

Notably, f the change is implemented ASAP, for the transition you can leverage the v1beta1 compatibility support already in place for other CAPI resources

```go
type FooMachinePoolStatus struct {
	// Ready is true when the provider resource is ready.
	// +optional
	Ready bool `json:"ready"`
    
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool status.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}
```

When `ready` becomes true the phase of the MachinePool changes from **provisioning** to **provisioned**. Its also the signal that the providerIDList and replica status fields should be set on the MachinePool.

### InfraMachinePool: pausing

Providers SHOULD implement the pause behaviour for every object with a reconciliation loop. This is done by checking if `spec.paused` is set on the Cluster object and by checking for the `cluster.x-k8s.io/paused` annotation on the InfraMachinePool object.

If implementing the pause behavior, providers SHOULD surface the paused status of an object using the Paused condition: `Status.Conditions[Paused]`.

> ### InfraMachinePool: conditions

Reviewer: Even if not directly related to this PR, I strongly reccomand to prioritise work on MP conditions aiming at the target state defined in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/main/docs/proposals/20240916-improve-status-in-CAPI-resources.md#machinepool-newconditions

Currently status.conditions are not computed, and status.deprecated.v1beta1.conditions will go away soon.

Also, If I'm not wrong
- Conditions from InfraMachinePool are surfaced in the deprecated conditions, but they only support v1beta1 condition format (and this is not aligned with the content of this paragraph)
- MP is setting the UpToDateCondition on controlled machines always to true, which seems not ideal

Author: I agree, i will ensure that this is added to MP working group list as a priority.

According to [Kubernetes API Conventions], Conditions provide a standard mechanism for higher-level
status reporting from a controller.

Providers implementers SHOULD implement `status.conditions` for their InfraMachinePool resource.
In case conditions are implemented on a InfraMachinePool resource, Cluster API will only consider conditions providing the following information:
- `type` (required)
- `status` (required, one of True, False, Unknown)
- `reason` (optional, if omitted a default one will be used)
- `message` (optional, if omitted an empty message will be used)
- `lastTransitionTime` (optional, if omitted time.Now will be used)
- `observedGeneration` (optional, if omitted the generation of the InfraMachinePool resource will be used)

Other fields will be ignored.

> Conditions are not currently used by the Cluster APIs MachinePool controllers for any logic or status reporting. This will likely change in the future.

Reviewer: I would suggest to set stage for the target state of this, e.g.

```suggestion
If a condition with type `Ready` exist, such condition will be mirrored in MachinePool’s `InfrastructureReady` condition (not implemented yet).

Please note that the `Ready` condition is expected to surface the status of the InfraMachinePool during its own entire lifecycle, including initial provisioning, the final deletion process, and the period in between these two moments.
```

	// +optional
	FailureMessage *string `json:"failureMessage,omitempty"`
    
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool status.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}
```

If a provider sets these fields then their value will populated to the same named fields on the the MachinePool.

<aside class="note warning">

<h1>New provider implementations</h1>

The use of `failureReason` and `failureMessage` should not be used for new InfraMachinePool implementations. In other areas of the Cluster API, starting from the v1beta2 contract version, there is no more special treatment for provider's terminal failures within Cluster API.

In case necessary, "terminal failures" should be surfaced using conditions, with a well documented type/reason;
it is up to consumers to treat them accordingly.

</aside>

### InfraMachinePoolTemplate, InfraMachineTemplatePoolList resource definition

For a given InfraMachinePool resource, you SHOULD also add a sorresponding InfraMachinePoolTemplate resource in order to use it in ClusterClasses. The template resource MUST be name `<InfraMachinePool>Template`.

> ### InfraMachinePoolTemplate: support for SSA dry run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```go
type FooMachinePoolSpec struct {
    // ProviderIDList is the list of identification IDs of machine instances managed by this Machine Pool
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=10000
    // +kubebuilder:validation:items:MinLength=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:items:MaxLength=512
    ProviderIDList []string `json:"providerIDList,omitempty"`
    
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool spec.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}
```

Cluster API uses this list to determine the status of the machine pool and to know when replicas have been deleted, at which point the Node will be deleted. Therefore, the list MUST be kept up to date.

### InfraMachinePool: initialization completed

Each InfraMachinePool MUST report when the MachinePool's infrastructure is fully provisioned (initialization) by setting `status.initialization.provisioned` in the InfraMachinePool resource.

```go
type FooMachinePoolStatus struct {
    // Ready is true when the provider resource is ready.
    // +optional
    Ready bool `json:"ready"`

> 

Author: A very good point, thanks @fabriziopandini . This has been removed.

| [InfraMachinePool: conditions]                                       | No        |                                      |
| [InfraMachinePool: replicas]                                         | Yes       |                                      |
| [InfraMachinePool: terminal failures]                                | No        |                                      |
| [InfraMachinePoolTemplate, InfraMachineTemplatePoolList resource definition] | No | Mandatory for ClusterClasses support |
| [InfraMachinePoolTemplate: support for SSA dry run]                  | No        | Mandatory for ClusterClasses support |
| [Multi tenancy]                                                      | No        | Mandatory for clusterctl CLI support |
| [Clusterctl support]                                                 | No        | Mandatory for clusterctl CLI support |

Note:

- `All resources` refers to all the provider's resources "core" Cluster API interacts with;
  In the context of this page: `InfraMachinePool`, `InfraMachinePoolTemplate` and corresponding list types
  

> ### All resources: scope

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### All resources: namespace scoping
```

Author: Leaving this as is to be consistent with the inframachine docs.

type FooMachinePoolInstanceStatus struct {
    // Addresses contains the associated addresses for the machine.
    // +optional
    Addresses []clusterv1.MachineAddress `json:"addresses,omitempty"`

    // InstanceName is the identification of the Machine Instance within the Machine Pool
    InstanceName string `json:"instanceName,omitempty"`

    // ProviderID is the provider identification of the Machine Pool Instance
    // +optional
    ProviderID *string `json:"providerID,omitempty"`

    // Version defines the Kubernetes version for the Machine Instance
    // +optional
    Version *string `json:"version,omitempty"`

    // Ready denotes that the machine is ready
    // +optional
    Ready bool `json:"ready"`
}
```

### MachinePoolMachines support

A provider can opt-in to MachinePool Machines (MPM). With MPM machines all the replicas in a MachinePool are represented by a Machine & InfraMachine. This enables core CAPI to perform common operations on single machines (and their Nodes), such as draining a node before scale down, integration with Cluster Autoscaler and also machine healthchecks.

> If you want to adopt MPM then you MUST have a `status.infrastructureMachineKind` field and the field must contain the resource kind of the InfraMachine that represent the replicas in the pool. For example, for the AWS provider the value would be set to `AWSMachine`.

Author: Changed.

    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=512
    ProviderID string `json:"providerID,omitempty"`
    
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool spec.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}
```

NOTE: To align with API conventions, we recommend since the v1beta2 contract that the `ProviderID` field should be
of type `string`.

### InfraMachinePool: providerIDList

Each InfraMachinePool MUST supply a list of the identification IDs of the machine instances managed by the machine pool by storing these in `spec.providerIDList`.

```go
type FooMachinePoolSpec struct {
    // ProviderIDList is the list of identification IDs of machine instances managed by this Machine Pool
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=10000
    // +kubebuilder:validation:items:MinLength=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:items:MaxLength=512
    ProviderIDList []string `json:"providerIDList,omitempty"`
    
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool spec.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}
```

> Cluster API uses this list to determine the status of the machine pool and to know when replicas have been deleted, at which point the Node will be deleted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cluster API uses this list to determine the status of the machine pool and to know when replicas have been deleted, at which point the Node will be deleted. Therefore, the list MUST be kept up to date.
```

    // +optional
    Ready bool `json:"ready"`

    // initialization provides observations of the FooMachinePool initialization process.
    // +optional
    Initialization FooMachinePoolInitializationStatus `json:"initialization,omitempty,omitzero"`
    
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool status.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}

// FooMachinePoolInitializationStatus provides observations of the FooMachinePool initialization process.
// +kubebuilder:validation:MinProperties=1
type FooMachinePoolInitializationStatus struct {
    // provisioned is true when the infrastructure provider reports that the MachinePool's infrastructure is fully provisioned.
    // +optional
    Provisioned *bool `json:"provisioned,omitempty"`
}

```

Once `status.ready` is set the MachinePool “core” controller will bubble up this info in MachinePool’s `status.initialization.infrastructureProvisioned`; also InfraMachinePools’s `spec.providerIDList` and `status.replicas` will be surfaced on MachinePool’s corresponding fields at the same time.

### InfraMachinePool: pausing

> Providers SHOULD implement the pause behaviour for every object with a reconciliation loop. This is done by checking if `spec.paused` is set on the Cluster object and by checking for the `cluster.x-k8s.io/paused` annotation on the InfraMachinePool object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Providers SHOULD implement the pause behaviour for every object with a reconciliation loop. This is done by checking if `spec.paused` is set on the Cluster object and by checking for the `cluster.x-k8s.io/paused` annotation on the InfraMachinePool object. Preferably, the utility `sigs.k8s.io/cluster-api/util/annotations.IsPaused(cluster, infraMachinePool)` SHOULD be used.
```

Author: Added

Please note that the `Ready` condition is expected to surface the status of the InfraMachinePool during its own entire lifecycle, including initial provisioning, the final deletion process, and the period in between these two moments.

See [Improving status in CAPI resources] for more context.

<aside class="note warning">

<h1>Compatibility with the deprecated v1beta1 contract</h1>

In order to ease the transition for providers, the v1beta2 version of the Cluster API contract _temporarily_
preserves compatibility with the deprecated v1beta1 contract; compatibility will be removed tentatively in August 2026.

With regards to conditions:

Cluster API will continue to read conditions from providers using deprecated Cluster API condition types.

Please note that provider that will continue to use deprecated Cluster API condition types MUST carefully take into account
the implication of this choice which are described both in the [Cluster API v1.11 migration notes] and in the [Improving status in CAPI resources] proposal.

</aside>

### InfraMachinePool: replicas

> Provider implementers MUST implement `status.replicas` to report the most recently observed number of machine instances in the pool. For example, in AWS this would be the number of replicas in a Auto Scale Group (ASG).

Author: Changed.

the best choice depending of if/how InfraMachinePools spec fields applies to many machine pools vs only one.

For each InfraMachinePoolTemplate resource, you MUST also add the corresponding list resource.
The list resource MUST be named as `<InfraMachinePoolTemplate>List`.

```go
// +kubebuilder:object:root=true

// FooMachinePoolTemplateList contains a list of FooMachinePoolTemplates.
type FooMachinePoolTemplateList struct {
    metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
    metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
    Items           []FooMachinePoolTemplate `json:"items"`
}
```

### InfraMachinePoolTemplate: support for SSA dry run

When Cluster API's topology controller is trying to identify differences between templates defined in a ClusterClass and
the current Cluster topology, it is required to run [Server Side Apply] (SSA) dry run call.

However, in case you have immutability checks for your InfraMachinePoolTemplate, this can lead the SSA dry run call to error.

In order to avoid this InfraMachinePoolTemplate MUST specifically implement support for SSA dry run calls from the topology controller.

> The implementation requires to use controller runtime's `CustomValidator`, available in CR versions >= v0.12.3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The implementation requires to use controller-runtime's `CustomValidator`, available since version v0.12.3.
```

(CR often stands for "Custom Resource", not for controller-runtime)

Author: Goo dpoint, changed.

```go
type FooMachinePoolSpec struct {
    // ProviderIDList is the list of identification IDs of machine instances managed by this Machine Pool
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=10000
    // +kubebuilder:validation:items:MinLength=1
    // +kubebuilder:validation:items:MaxLength=512
    ProviderIDList []string `json:"providerIDList,omitempty"`
    
    // See other rules for more details about mandatory/optional fields in InfraMachinePool spec.
    // Other fields SHOULD be added based on the needs of your provider.
}
```

Cluster API uses this list to determine the status of the machine pool and to know when replicas have been deleted, at which point the Node will be deleted. Therefore, the list MUST be kept up to date.

### InfraMachinePool: initialization completed

Each provider MUST indicate when then the InfraMachinePool has been completely provisioned.

Currently this is done by setting `status.ready` to **true**.  The value returned here is stored in the MachinePool's `status.infraStructureReady` field.

> Additionally providers should set `initialization.provisioned` to **true**. This value isn't currently used by core CAPI for MachinePools. However, MachinePools will start to use this instead and `status.ready` will be deprecated. By setting both these fields it will make the future migration easier.

Reviewer: I'm not sure asking providers to have both provides benefit, e.g. for other contract we ask to have one, depending on the contract they declare the provider is supporting.
 
Also, do you have a timeline in mind for for this to happen?

(for sake of simplicity I would prefer if there is only one way to transition from one contract version to another; similarly it will be easier to manage if we can align the timeline to v1beta1 removal)
